---
layout: post
title: "The long game"
subtitle: "Socialism in 2050"
author: "Will Stedden"
category: commentary
---

I recently read Bill Gates' book <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/books/2021/feb/17/how-to-avoid-a-climate-disaster-by-bill-gates-review-why-science-isnt-enough">How to Avoid a Climate Disaster</a>. While I have a huge problem with the book's philosophy (briefly, unpredictable scientific breakthroughs will save us, politics is impossible, and we can't even talk about reducing consumption), I have taken one thing away from it in this blog's approach to advocating for a socialist revolution: work backwards from a goal and a long-term horizon.

I know many people want a socialist revolution <strong>now</strong>, and they are working toward that goal either through political process or through yelling at other people on twitter.  Sadly, I am one small person with limited ability to effect massive changes, and realizing that, I've decided to take a different approach.

Some would call it incrementalist, but I, personally, see it as drastic&mdash;just over a longer timescale.

### The case for working backwards

Gates' emphasized an interesting point when discussing how to evalutate different strategies for reaching net-zero carbon emissions by 2050. On the one hand, you can pursue a set of policies that can bring the largest drops in carbon emissions by 2030, but which might jeopardize the ability to get larger reductions by 2050.  Or on the other hand, you can pursue a set of policies that are much more likely to bring even greater reductions by 2050, but which may rely on delaying implementation after 2030 to avoid implementing something that sets back the long-term goal.

In an even more extreme example, you might consider how can I reduce carbon emissions as much as possible this year, but this might actually have a backfire effect over the longterm.   in the specific case of climate change, reducing emissions a little bit over the short term isn't helpful if it messes up with reaching net-zero over the long term.  Therefore, you wouldn't want to pursue a strategy that emphasizes short term gain.

We can look at a lot of things in this same light.  And in particular, I want to approach the construction of a sustainable, human-centered society in this way.

To do this, I'm going to work backwards from where I imiagine the world could be, and give myself a suitable time-horizon to make it happen.

### What's the goal

For climate change, the easily identifiable goal is carbon neutrality.  For an equitable and sustainable world, the endpoint is harder to identify.  There are competing issues that need to be rectified, and, honestly, it isn't up solely to me to identify what those are.

Nevertheless, for articulating my own plan of action, I need to pick some endpoint that I think matches with the ideals that I think satisfy the basic ideas of leftism.  I think there needs to be two major points

1) Increased standard of living so everyone on Earth is living with at least $30/day

2) No one consuming more than a sustainable share of Earth's natural resources

3) No coerced work

### 2050

Why 2050?  None of my reasons for picking this year are particularly scientific.  First, I think it's good to mirror the climate rhetoric around 2050 because, ultimately, an egalitarian society is part of making a world that is both sustainable.  Second, I think that it is good to have an endpoint that is still within the productive lifetime of my generation.  It would be too depressing to have the generation most harmed by capitalism to have to suffer under its yoke just long enough to free future generations but not to enjoy the benefits themselves.  Third, although it's morbid, I think that between now and 2050 many people who are just not amenable to change will die off.

And finally, I think that 28 years is enough time to spread the message and make change.  I have a broad based plan written below, and I think that 28 years is just enough time to see it happen.

### Socialism in 28 years, broken down

So how would it be possible to get to a point with $30/day standard of living, no excess consumption, and no coerced work?

I think it comes on three fronts: culture shift, mutual aid networks, and electoral politics.

#### Culture shift

I think the absolute most necessary change for creating a socialist society is the ongoing cultural shift towards collectivist morals.  Ultimately, I don't believe there can be any change without a shift in people's values underneath.  In fact, I think that the backlash to change is even more pronounced when someone tries to make change prior to the underlying cultural shift.

But how do you take action for a culture shift?  It seems like culture shifts are assumed to be organic changes, but I believe there is a way to impact culture even if it's slow moving.  There are two core parts to this: change the conversation to shift the Overton window, and shift social status from capitalist values to egalitarian ones.

For the second part, shifting the definition of what brings social status, the key is to remain very very vigilant about only holding people in high regard who embody the principles you want to see.  For a socialist culture shift, you have to want to be friends with the people who share their resources instead of using them to get richer and people who do real work instead of leeching off of others just because they can.  I think the most important part of that is having ideas of solidarity be completely central for giving people elevated social status in our life.

Now, the problem is that getting people bought into this new culture can only happen as fast as you can convince one friend to make this same change.  So starting with just myself, and assuming I can convince 1 friend per year, then it'll take 28 years to pass 200 million people bought in.  Of course, that isn't really how culture changes, but the idea is that if on average every person can bring one person over to the good side each year, then by 2050 we'll have the majority of the US subscribing to solidarity culture.

#### Mutual aid and the solidarity economy

The truth is no amount of idealism can really change what we need to survive.  Even if we only like people with good values, if we still need people who are cutthroat in order to keep our economy running, then they will continue to hold all the power. So the second part is helping everyone shift their consumption to a new economy based on mutual aid, reciprocity, and solidarity with the people that do the work.

There's never been a better time to do this.  Technology-wise it is super easy to make our economy completely transparent.  And there's never been an easier time to let regular people connect with each other and share things that agree with their values.  So creating a parralel economy that avoids exploitation seems to be possible for the first time.

But it'll still be next to impossible to move the big, monopolistic juggernauts that dominate our economy.  Wall Street, Hollywood, Silicon Valley, the military industrial complex, Big Ag, Big Pharma, and all the other "Big" players make it very hard to do large scale things.  So I see this rolling out in two phases.

First, we'll have 10 years developing more and more solidarity economic solutions for the most fundamental features of our life.  Farming, childcare, eldercare, food service, and housing will need a transition to just and community-oriented businesses.  But this will be hard, because price is the biggest decision maker in our standard economy. We'll have to find a way to keep the prices low in the cooperative economy, while driving prices up in the exploitative economy through stricter labor laws and good union support.

Second, there is going to be a big shift happening at the same time as this across the US towards automation. Automation is fundamentally good, but it comes with the big downside that the people who benefit will always be the owners at the expense of the workers.  Consumers don't see much change, as they still pay close to the same amount, but owners start taking more profit and firing their employees.  So as this shift to a solidarity economy occurs, we're going to need to stand in solidarity with each other and reduce our total work and total pay rather than overproduce.  Because if we overproduce we'll devalue what we make.  The only other way I can see this to work out is if we keep working the same amount but some people have to relocate to other parts of the world to share their knowledge there.

No matter what it's going to be a challenge, but without a backup economy, I don't see a way to shift power away from small groups back to all citizens.

#### Elections are crucial

Even though most people on the left seem to be mad about voting, we still have to do it.  The truth is our options for electoral politics are such a dumpster fire because, like in most areas, our elder generations failed to keep the focused time and energy on shaping the way politics worked out over the past 30 years or so.  So like in most ways, we need to get started putting things back right.

I don't know the best path forward, but the only one that I think I see is saddling up to the democratic socialists and making incremental shifts to the Democratic party.  This will need to occur on multiple fronts, but hopefullyt the demographic changes, and the rising education levels of younger generations should help.  I think the biggest leverage point is getting leftists into positions of power in state legislatures.  I think progressive and socialist candidates are already set up for local government positions, but statewide legislatures have been historically dominated by the right wing party. And of course, the fight has to continue in the US federal branch as well.  All levels are important, and I'm certainly not in a position to suggest that we cede anything.

For myself personally, I'm going to continue campaigning with the lesser of two evils when I have to, and always advocating for the most left leaning candidate anywhere.

Importantly, with the long-game strategy it's not really acceptable to condemn someone for "not doing enough" when they are part of a small but growing minority, particularly for <a href="https://forcethevote.org/home/">performative optics</a>. Elections and law are ultimately deeply challenging, and not my area of expertise, but they're also necessary to govern the world in a more just manner.  So I plan to stay involved and keep my support for the dark horse outsider leftist even if they seem hopelessly outnumbered.

### The long game is just a series of short games

The most important thing to remember is that just because the endpoint is 28 years out, the work is going to be carried out in a million little battles along the way.

For me, my most important goal is to focus on creating 1 long term friendship that moves the needle slightly to the left every year. And a second goal is to move a larger and larger percentage of my expenses into the solidarity economy every year. And the third goal is to dedicate more and more time to leftist politics every year.

And fortunately, the whole philosophy of leftism reinforces that it shouldn't be the undertaking of one heroic person anyway, but the collective small efforts of everyone together that should shape the world.